And this morning, we're going to have a very
interesting and yet historical program as well.
Our guest for the talk show on Wednesday, March the
8th is Dr. Hugh M. Phillips, retired doctor of
veterinary medicine. And Dr. Phillips, how are
you this morning? Fine, Chipper. We appreciate
you coming out, and we're going to be talking about
the history of veterinary medicine in Texas.
We're going to be talking about several things, as
well as your career, not only here in Russ County,
but before you moved to Russ County, which was back
in the 40s, as I understand it. But to get things
rolling, tell us first of all, you've prepared a
paper and it was presented a week or so ago in
Longview at an East Texas historical meeting.
Tell us the purpose of the paper and why we're going
into this history of veterinary medicine in
Texas. What's the purpose of it? Well, Chipper,
the first week that I retired in February of 1985, I
went to Houston to the State Veterinary
Convention and I was asked at that time if I would
like to serve on the historical committee for the
state association. And since that was my cup of
tea, I accepted that assignment and have enjoyed
working with that group. We meet twice a year.
Every August we meet in Austin and then In the
winter, we always attend the Texas Veterinary
Medical Association convention and meet as a
committee. Okay, now, from this, you and other
colleagues, veterinarians, are going to be
compiling a book, I understand it. That's right.
What's it going to entail? Well, it will be
entitled The History of Veterinary Medicine in
Texas. We thought that At first we thought a catchy
title might be proper, but we decided later that in
the interest of communicating with people, we
would call it The History of Veterinary Medicine
in Texas. That's not going to be quite a clinical
book, I hope, one that anyone that could read and
understand the terms and understand what went on
just sort of a historical basis. happening of how
veterinary medicine got started in Texas? It has
to be more than just dates and pictures. It will
have some interesting stories in it and it will be
readable. If it isn't, then of course it won't
sell. And we want to sell books enough to pay for the
printing. When do you expect the book to be
completed? We have already hired an author last
summer and he's working Of course, it will
probably still be another year or two. Okay. But
the preliminary work has begun, and you, along
with the other veterinarians of Texas, are doing
research and talking and compiling this
information, I guess, aren't you? Right. Well,
let's just kind of get started. Before we do, just a
brief... We're going to be going into your... that
you've had here in Henderson. You practiced, I
believe, 38 years. Yes, in Henderson. In
Henderson. And before that, we'll be getting into
your sort of biography in just a minute. And we want
to sort of get an idea of why veterinary medicine,
when it began in Texas and why. What started the
interest in veterinary medicine? The history of
veterinary medicine in Texas... is linked to the
cattle industry and the Texas tick fever. All of us
who are old enough to remember seeing cattle die in
the 1920 era know how important Texas tick fever
was to the cattle industry. The care and treatment
of sick animals in Texas for many years were
limited to the domestic livestock such as cattle,
horses, mules, swine, sheep, and goats. But The
main thing that people were interested in was the
death of many cattle that were dying throughout
the country with Texas tick fever. Who diagnosed
Texas tick fever? Who gave it its name? It was
called Texas tick fever because it was supposed
that the disease was caused by the ticks, but they
weren't sure. They had to prove it. And of
course... As all of us older people remember,
the Texas tick fever killed many cattle
throughout the South, and the cattle that were on
premises that were exposed in the northern states
would die along the line of the trail drive as they
went north. Texas was very unpopular. bringing
their cattle into those other states. I bet it was.
Okay, what years... Give us some dates when this
began. What are we talking about here? We have
recorded the fact that in 1855, the state of
Missouri quit buying Texas cattle, boycotted
Texas, you might say, because they had... had
learned that the cattle that came from Texas would
kill some of their herds if they were exposed to the
Texas cattle. And that was before the Civil War in
1855. So the seriousness of people boycotting
Texas because of the Texas tick fever was reason
enough to do something about this, because it was
all the cattle in Texas and everything else, it was
a big industry. What, of course, right now, the
Texas A&M Veterinary Medicine Center in College
Station is very famous for the veterinary school
there. What brought it about? Give us a little
background on it. How was Texas A&M Veterinary
Medicine, how did you get it started? In 1888, a
combination of factors paved the way for the
advent of a serious program in veterinary studies
initiated at the Agricultural and Mechanical
College of Texas, now known as Texas A&M
University. First, through the efforts of Dr. H.
H. Dinwiddie, faculty chairman, the farmers and
cattlemen around the state became aware of
scientific breeding and care of livestock. Also,
the decade of the 1880s marked the crossroads for
the Texas livestock industry. A practical barbed
wire invented by Joe Glidden of Illinois in 1873
began to have a great impact on Texas open range and
the cattle industry. The fencing wars of 1887 and
1888 are recorded in the history of ranching and
farming in the Central and Southwestern states.
Then also influential to the development of
veterinary medicine in Texas was the reluctance
of the northern states to admit Texas cattle. Some
Texas cattle were immune to the disease by having
it occur and surviving when they were young. But
northern cattle exposed to these Texas cattle
produced epidemics which destroyed entire
herds. Of course, some of the cattle would live
through the disease but became carriers, like
people who had malaria could be carriers. And
those cattle, ticks would bite them and then go and
bite healthy cattle in the northern states. and
they would start dying. Okay. Our guest this
morning is Dr. Hugh M. Phillips, a retired doctor
of veterinary medicine who has served 38 years
here in the Henderson area as a veterinarian, and
we're talking about the history of veterinary
medicine in Texas, and we've got a very
interesting program and a lot of information to
give you, so stay tuned this morning. We'll be back
in just a moment. on the Roadshow for a Wednesday
morning, March the 8th, 1989. Our guest, Dr. Hugh
M. Phillips, retired doctor of veterinary
medicine. We're talking about the history of
veterinary medicine in Texas, and a little later
on, we're going to be talking more about his
career, when he began study in veterinary
medicine, his interest in veterinary medicine,
and also Some things he's run into here in Russ
County over his 38-year career. Sorry about that,
doctor. 38-year career. We're going to be
throwing a lot of dates around at him. Matter of
fact, we started as early as 1855 when Missouri
stopped importing Texas cattle. And this came
about because of Texas tick fever. It's something
that was spreading and was very... deadly to the
cattle in Texas and it was spreading and this did
hurt the cattle industry in Texas. Therefore, the
veterinary medicine industry got a real close
looking at. And who were some of the early pioneers
at Texas A&M University who came down and took a
look at what was going on? Where did they come from?
On June the 6th, 1888, Dr. Mark Francis became the
first veterinarian hired by Texas A&M, and
through his work with cattle, became one of the
most distinguished men in American veterinary
history. He was born in Ohio and graduated from
Ohio State University in 1887 with degree of
doctor of veterinary medicine. Dr. Francis
worked as associate professor of vet science and
veterinarian for the newly created experiment
station. While Governor Lawrence Sullivan Ross
was president of A&M College, the attitude of the
public changed rapidly. Governor Ross asked for a
building for chemistry and one for veterinary
medicine, but the legislature would not
appropriate the money in spite of the plea of
farmers and ranchers. When Colonel L.L. Foster
became president of A&M after Governor Ross's
death, he asked for a building costing $75,000,
but returned from Austin and said he could get only
$35,000. The college accepted this $35,000 and
built a two-story building. The ground floor was
used for veterinary medicine. the second floor
for chemistry. This building stood where the
Cushing Library now stands. Dr. R.P. Marsteller,
who was dean of the vet school in 1940 when I was
entered into the School of Veterinary Medicine,
joined Dr. Francis in 1905 in the efforts to
control tick fever. He was also a graduate of the
University of Ohio. Governor James Pappy
Ferguson known well by all of the older people as
Pappy, was impressed with the favorable results
in immunizing cattle against Texas fever on his
Bosque County ranch in February of 1916 and told
the board of directors that he would approve an
appropriation for suitable buildings for this
purpose. The next session of the legislature
provided $100,000 for a building. It was
completed in 1918 through experiments in
cooperation with Kansas Agricultural
Experiment Station. In 1894, the transmission of
the Texas tick fever was narrowed down to the
common southern tick, Buophilus bovis. The
discovery that the bite of this tick was the only
way that Texas cattle fever was transmitted was
the key to the problem of how to control the
disease. Thus, by dipping all cattle with an
arsenical dip, every two weeks the disease could
be controlled. Okay, so that was a very important
finding then. They found that they could control
Texas tick fever by dipping cattle. Describe
dipping to us. What is it? Well, all of the people
who are lucky enough to be 65 years old and older can
remember when all of our parents were dipping
their cattle. It was a big day when a little guy
could go help drive the cattle to the dipping vats.
Of course, most of the older men who were dipping
cattle then have already gone to their reward. But
we who are between 60 and 70 years old remember
helping to dip the cattle. In Gilmer, where I was
born, I remember talking about it in the first
grade, so that's why I know that it was in full swing
in 1927.
And also, I've heard many people talk about the
dipping vats in Russ County that they remember as
children. Did they completely submerge the
cattle head and everything? Yes, the cattle would
be pinned behind the dipping vat. They would have
to be jumped off into the dipping vat. Then they
would swim about 12 to 15 feet and then be able to
walk out. And what was contained in the vat? An
arsenical mixture with the water of arsenic.
Okay, which when the ticks bit the cattle, the
ticks died? Yes. Okay. One question I would have,
was Texas tick fever transferable to humans, from
cattle to humans? What happens when humans were
bit by these ticks? The Texas tick fever did not
affect people other than killing their cattle. It
was a disease confined only to cattle caused by one
species of tick. very similar to the disease of
malaria that was seen in people in that it was a
protozoan parasite that was being transferred.
And this protozoan parasite lived in the red blood
cells and destroyed the red blood cells,
producing anemia and jaundice. And one of the
seriousnesses of this disease was that it was
causing a loss of money to Texas. I believe you have
some facts and figures on how much it was costing us
back then and the seriousness of it. Give us a
little history on that after they... saw that
there was a problem, they needed to find a cure. But
before that, I believe some studies were made, and
how much money was Texas losing? Way back in, I
believe it was the early 1900s. Well, despite the
perfection of the dipping vats and inoculation of
caves with blood from infected animals, which
would give the young caves the disease, and most of
them would live through it if they took the disease
as a cave, and the caves were fed and properly
treated, and that would immunize them. In spite of
this... Dr. Francis reported in 1912 that losses
from this disease in the United States still
approached $50 million per year in deaths and
restrictions of trade. Texas tick fever was
finally eradicated in the early 1930s by this
compulsory dipping of all cattle every two to two
and a half weeks during spring, summer, and fall.
But in 1911, The biannual report by the government
included a new reason for establishing the School
of Veterinary Medicine at A&M, giving the number
and the value of Texas domestic livestock as 16
million animals, valued at $350 million. So with
this much investment in the cattle industry here,
we needed a ready supply of veterinarians, and
there weren't that many veterinarians in Texas at
that time, just under 100, as I understand. That's
right. The care of all of these animals rested in
the hands of only 75 out-of-state graduate
veterinarians who were graduated in other states
because Texas didn't have a veterinary school.
Several hundred untrained but certified
practitioners were also practicing a third group
of self-styled veterinarians, usually referred
to by most people as quacks, whose impossible
remedies and irregular business methods had
disgusted the public for years. In 1914, The state
of Texas certified anyone who actively
participated in the health care of domestic
animals for five consecutive years preceding
1914. I remember old Dr. Hare up at Gilmer, who was
treating the cattle and the horses when I was a
child. And he was a certified non-graduate, moved
from Winnsboro to Gilmer. Okay, so where we're up
to right about now is the 1914-1915 era, and we're
just before A&M begins a veterinary medical
school. And we want to take a quick break right here
and mention that Dr. Hugh M. Phillips is our guest
this morning on the talk show. He's a retired
doctor of veterinary medicine and involved in a
book being compiled now, The History of
Veterinary Medicine in Texas. And we're going to
be talking more and at length about the history
this morning and also his 38-year career here in
Henderson as well and some of the particular and
peculiar diseases that he's seen over the years
here in Russ County and East Texas. So stay with us
this morning with Dr. Hugh M. Phillips, retired
doctor of veterinary medicine. We'll be back in
just a moment. Roadshow for Wednesday morning
March the 8th 1989 our subject this morning is the
history of veterinary medicine in Texas and we're
going to be getting even more specific as that of
here in Rusk County in just a few minutes but we're
trying to lead you up and show you where veterinary
medicine got started here in the state of Texas our
guest is 38-year veteran here in Russ County of the
veterinary profession, Dr. Hugh M. Phillips,
retired doctor of veterinary medicine. And he's
our guest, and he's one of several men who are
compiling the information for a book which will be
entitled The History of Veterinary Medicine in
Texas. And let's see, Dr. Phillips, tell us about
the founders of the College of Veterinary
Medicine at A&M. We're back in probably the early
1900s, around 1910 to 1915. Give us some dates, and
who were these people that started it? Well, A&M
had already hired Dr. Francis in 1888. In 1911,
Dr. R.C. Dunn, another Ohio veterinarian, joined
the A&M faculty as chief laboratory technician in
charge of the production of whole cholera serum.
That was another disease that was real important
in Texas. In 1913, the last of the four founders of
the College of Veterinary Medicine at A&M joined
the faculty. Dr. Hubert Smith of Comfort, Texas,
received his DVM degree from the Royal Veterinary
College in Berlin, Germany in 1912. and joined the
staff at A&M working to control two other diseases
which were called Creeps, C-R-E-E-P-S, and
Loewen disease caused by mineral deficiencies
and seen along the Texas Gulf Coast before
minerals were added to the cattle feeding
programs.
He was the fourth of the founders of veterinary
medicine at Texas A&M.
During the decades after 1900, the veterinarians
at A&M also worked extensively and successfully
to control anthrax, black leg, tetanus, rabies,
hoof and mouth disease, and hog cholera. What year
specifically was the College of Veterinary
Medicine begun? On April the 10th, 1916, the Board
of Directors established the School of
Veterinary Medicine at College Station. Dr. Mark
Francis was made the first dean. Okay, and let's
see, they started... working on all these
diseases that were common to Texas. And what kind
of facilities, what did they do to, what were their
early buildings like? How much money did they have
to spend? Did the state legislature come in with
some money, or who provided the funding to begin
the school? I already mentioned the fact that they
had secured money to build one building. Right.
And, of course, in 1932, the A&M directors decided
to build a new vet hospital and clinic at the total
cost of $225,000. That's a lot of money in 1932,
wasn't it? Right. And that money was derived from
oil funds. The East Texas oil boom was in swing, and
a lot of money was going to Austin. So they were able
to build a few additional buildings in 1932 and
1933. Those were the buildings that I used as a
student. They were over on the east side of the A&M
campus. But in 1953 and 55, a new and modern
veterinary complex was erected west of the
railroad on Farm Highway 60, costing millions of
dollars.
The first class of graduates of the A&M Veterinary
School was 13 in number, and they graduated in 19
and 20. 68 years ago dr raymond childers of jasper
was the only one of those older men i personally
knew he used to attend some of the conventions
years ago he graduated 13 people in 1920 68 years
ago my goodness and you met one of the original 13
and knew him okay um Tell us about the years of the
20s and 30s for the veterinary. They started
graduating in 1920. What was it like for a
veterinary? Well, during the 1920s and 1930s, a
county in Texas was lucky to have a graduate
veterinarian in the county. And some counties
didn't have graduate veterinarians until after
World War II. because many of the veterinarians
volunteered and joined the armed services during
World War II. My hometown of Gilmer, Upshur
County, was without a graduate practitioner
until 1953 when Dr. Chester Studdard moved there
from Tyler. Well, let's get into a little bit about
what interested you in veterinary medicine. I
guess as a child, you must have been interested in
animals. Tell us your story. You said you grew up in
Gilmer. Tell us about that. As a child, I was always
interested in animals of any kind. I had what my
friends told me was a menagerie. They didn't call
it a zoo, but the backyard and cow pasture was full
of animals. I had goats. and cattle and donkeys,
rabbits and all kinds of pets, possums and
whatever I could find to put in a cage and take care
of. And then also I helped to take care of all the
neighbors' animals. And I became a people person
as well as an animal lover. Don't give me any kind of
work to do on mechanics, anything related to
people or animals I'm interested in. Of course,
after that interest in animals, I went to A&M in
1938 thinking I wanted to become a county agent
because I admired the county agent at Gilmer, Mr.
W.D. Seals. I had never known a graduate
veterinarian. But after I became a student at A&M,
looking at the textbooks of the vet students, I
became interested. And I was visiting my brother
out in Rock Springs, Texas, Edwards County, and
the county agent out there was doing the vet work.
My brother, being a young MD, would assist the
county agent if it was some valuable animal. So I
was down there one Thanksgiving, and the two of
them asked me why I didn't study veterinary
medicine. How old were you at that time? Well, I had
been in A&M a year and a half. So I was possibly about
19 and a half years old. So when I got back to A&M, I
visited Dr. Marsteller in the dean's office and
found out that I could easily change my course to
veterinary medicine. And that's the way I changed
my mind and decided to be a veterinarian instead of
a county agent. I noticed in the notes that you had
met Dr. Francis. Now, he was the first licensed
veterinarian that came to A&M in 1888. Mark
Francis, is that correct? Right, Dr. Mark
Francis. Tell us that story when you got to meet
him. I believe you didn't know who he was when you
met him until a couple of years later. As a child,
about 11 or 12 years old, I was lucky enough that I
got to go to A&M and spend a week when my father and
the man who lived on my father's farm wanted to go
and attend one of the short courses, a seminar.
The Chafin family lived on my father's old home
place and two of their sons and one of my brothers
and I accompanied our fathers, and while they were
attending the seminar, we could get out and roam
the campus. We were responsible children back in
those days, and they didn't worry about us, so we
visited all the buildings that were open. One was a
small museum, and in this museum, They had the
little lambs that were born with two heads and a
little calf that had six legs and a colt that had two
hoofs on each of its back legs. Things like that I
remember as though it happened yesterday. And in
this laboratory, or rather in this museum, was an
old gentleman wearing a white coat and long white
hair. And I later learned, when I went to A&M, that
he was Dr. Mark Francis, who had become interested
in that museum. And that was the year of probably
19... 30 or 31 that I met him there and spoke to him
but had no idea who he was until I became a vet
student in 1940 and I was told that Dr. Mark Francis
was there in charge of that small museum the last
few years that he lived. He lived until 36 and I
became a student at A&M in 38 and a vet student in 40.
Okay. All right, tell us about when you entered vet
school in 1940. When did you graduate, and what did
you do upon graduation? In 1940, I became a student
of veterinary medicine. And, of course, World War
II started in 1941. And before I graduated, the
ASTP, ASTP, Army Specialized Training Program,
started. And about half of the senior class and
most of the juniors and sophomores in the vet
school were interested in Army careers, so they
were taken to San Antonio and inducted into the
Army and returned to A&M and finished their
studies there. And that was when Major Charles D.
Apple, who resided here in Russ County for many
years, became our commanding officer. I met him at
A&M, and then he was one of my very good friends when
I started practicing here. And many people know
the Charles Apple family who lived out on the
Kilgore Highway. After graduating from A&M in
October of 43, six of us in the class received
commissions as first lieutenants and then we went
into the army left by train from dallas and arrived
at carlisle barracks pennsylvania after about
three days and went through this overseas
training school at carlisle barracks that was the
school at jim thorpe a famous